Update FAQ for Upcoming GDC Data Release (#10894)
cBioPortal/cbioportal: docs/user-guide/faq.md

        * [The data today is different than the last time i looked. What happened?](/user-guide/faq.md#the-data-today-is-different-than-the-last-time-i-looked-what-happened)
        * [How do I access data from AACR Project GENIE?](/user-guide/faq.md#how-do-i-access-data-from-aacr-project-genie)
    * [TCGA](/user-guide/faq.md#tcga)
        * [How does TCGA data in cBioPortal compare to TCGA data in Genome Data Commons?](/user-guide/faq.md#how-does-tcga-data-in-cbioportal-compare-to-tcga-data-in-genome-data-commons)

>         * [What happened to TCGA Provisional datasets?](/user-guide/faq.md#what-happened-to-tcga-provisional-datasets)

Reviewer: This question still exists below so should not be deleted here

        * [What is the difference between a “splice site” mutation and a “splice region” mutation?](/user-guide/faq.md#what-is-the-difference-between-a-splice-site-mutation-and-a-splice-region-mutation)
        * [What do “Amplification”, “Gain”, “Deep Deletion”, “Shallow Deletion” and "-2", "-1", "0", "1", and "2" mean in the copy-number data?](/user-guide/faq.md#what-do-amplification-gain-deep-deletion-shallow-deletion-and--2--1-0-1-and-2-mean-in-the-copy-number-data)
        * [What is GISTIC? What is RAE?](/user-guide/faq.md#what-is-gistic-what-is-rae)

>         * [What is ASCAT and how is it used in cBioPortal?](#what-is-ascat-and-how-is-it-used-in-cbioportal)

Author: I wasn't sure if this might cause confusion, since GISTIC and RAE are supported directly but ASCAT is not.

>         * [What is ASCAT and how is it used in cBioPortal?](#what-is-ascat-and-how-is-it-used-in-cbioportal)

Reviewer 2: I think its ok, since you're converting ASCAT to GISTIC like values, so they are related.

#### What version of the human reference genome is being used in cBioPortal?

> The [public cBioPortal](https://www.cbioportal.org) largely uses hg19/GRCh37. However, there are plans to incorporate more hg38/GRCh38 studies in the future; for example, the newly incorporated NCI-CRDC studies use GRCh38.

Reviewer 2: ... However there are studies that use the hg38/GRCh38 reference genome, including datasets sourced from the GDC through ISB-CGC BigQuery.

Data from AACR Project GENIE are provided in a [dedicated instance of cBioPortal](https://www.cbioportal.org/genie/). You can also download GENIE data from the [Synapse Platform](https://synapse.org/genie). Note that you will need to register before accessing the data. Additional information about AACR Project GENIE can be found on the [AACR website](https://www.aacr.org/Research/Research/Pages/aacr-project-genie.aspx).

### TCGA
#### What are the TCGA studies sourced from the Genomic Data Commons (GDC)?

> The GDC TCGA studies mirror the [Cancer Gateway in the Cloud (ISB-CGC)](https://bq-search.isb-cgc.org/search?status=current) that is hosted on Google BigQuery, which in turn pulls data from GDC. Our [NCI-CRDC pipeline](https://github.com/cBioPortal/nci-crdc-pipeline) pulls data from ISB-CGC and transforms it into cBioPortal-formatted files. The resulting studies are intended to be a pure reflection of what is available inside ISB-CGC; we do not augment them with data from our legacy studies. For more information on how ISB-CGC handles GDC data, see [Programs and Data Sets](https://isb-cancer-genomics-cloud.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sections/Hosted-Data.html) and [GDC Overview](https://isb-cancer-genomics-cloud.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sections/data/GDC_top.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The GDC TCGA studies mirror the [Cancer Gateway in the Cloud (ISB-CGC)](https://bq-search.isb-cgc.org/search?status=current) that is hosted on Google BigQuery, which in turn pulls data from GDC. Our [NCI-CRDC pipeline](https://github.com/cBioPortal/nci-crdc-pipeline) pulls data from ISB-CGC and transforms it into cBioPortal-formatted files. The resulting studies are intended to be a pure reflection of what is available inside ISB-CGC; we do not augment them with data from our other TCGA studies. For more information on how ISB-CGC handles GDC data, see [Programs and Data Sets](https://isb-cancer-genomics-cloud.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sections/Hosted-Data.html) and [GDC Overview](https://isb-cancer-genomics-cloud.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sections/data/GDC_top.html).
```

> #### How do the TCGA studies sourced from GDC compare to the TCGA PanCancer and Firehose Legacy studies?

Reviewer: Right now we have this question and also "What are TCGA Firehose Legacy datasets and how do they compare to the publication-associated datasets and the PanCancer Atlas datasets?" below. Rather than 2 questions that each compare 3 of the different TCGA options, I think it would be clearer to combine into a single question which describes PanCan vs GDC vs publication vs Firehose Legacy. Can you integrate this content into the existing question below?

TCGA studies sourced from GDC use a newer version of the human reference genome, GRCh38 instead of GRCh37. For more information about the GDC data processing pipeline, see [GDC Data Processing](https://gdc.cancer.gov/about-data/gdc-data-processing). Transformations specific to our NCI-CRDC pipeline are documented in the [cBioPortal Datahub](https://github.com/cBioPortal/datahub).

> For non-GDC TCGA studies, we have the original mutation data generated by the individual TCGA sequencing centers. The source of the data is the Broad Firehose (or the publication pages for data that matches a specific manuscript). These data are usually a combination of two mutation callers, but they differ by center (typically a variant caller like MuTect plus an indel caller), and sequencing centers have modified their mutation calling pipelines over time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For non-GDC TCGA studies, we have the original mutation data generated by the individual TCGA sequencing centers. The source of the data is the Broad Firehose (or the publication pages for data that matches a specific manuscript). These data are usually a combination of two mutation callers e.g. a variant caller like MuTect plus an indel caller. Note that the specific tools used and the overall process for identifying mutations can vary between centers and may have changed over time.
```

Data from AACR Project GENIE are provided in a [dedicated instance of cBioPortal](https://www.cbioportal.org/genie/). You can also download GENIE data from the [Synapse Platform](https://synapse.org/genie). Note that you will need to register before accessing the data. Additional information about AACR Project GENIE can be found on the [AACR website](https://www.aacr.org/Research/Research/Pages/aacr-project-genie.aspx).

### TCGA
#### What are the TCGA studies sourced from the Genomic Data Commons (GDC)?
The GDC TCGA studies mirror the [Cancer Gateway in the Cloud (ISB-CGC)](https://portal.isb-cgc.org) that is hosted on Google BigQuery, which in turn pulls data from GDC. The [NCI-CRDC pipeline](https://github.com/cBioPortal/nci-crdc-pipeline) pulls data from ISB-CGC and transforms it into cBioPortal-formatted files. The resulting studies are intended to be a pure reflection of what is available inside ISB-CGC; we do not augment them with data from our legacy studies.

For more information on how GDC data is processed, refer to the following links:

> - [GDC Data Processing](https://gdc.cancer.gov/about-data/gdc-data-processing)

Reviewer 2: Move this to next section

- [ISB-CGC Programs and Data Sets](https://isb-cancer-genomics-cloud.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sections/Hosted-Data.html)
- [ISB-CGC GDC Overview](https://isb-cancer-genomics-cloud.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sections/data/GDC_top.html)

> - [NCI-CRDC Pipeline Data Transformations](https://github.com/cBioPortal/datahub/blob/gdcv1/crdc/gdc/brca_tcga_gdc/README.md) (may vary by study)

Reviewer 2: Remove this link

> #### How do the GDC TCGA studies compare to the TCGA PanCancer / Firehose Legacy studies?

Reviewer 2: I would use the same label here:

"How do the TCGA Studies sourced from GDC compare to the TCGA PanCancer  and Firehose Legacy studies?"

> The GDC TCGA studies from ISB-CGC are updated frequently as new GDC releases come out, as opposed to the older TCGA datasets which are largely frozen. Also, the GDC studies use a newer version of the human reference genome, GRCh38 instead of GRCh37.

Reviewer 2: Drop this first paragraph

Reviewer 4: Are TCGA studies in GDC still being updated?

Author: @jjgao According to the ISB team, the TCGA data in ISB-CGC BigQuery should be frozen. However, we will still run our pipeline every couple of months, and we may make changes to how we process that data through our pipeline.

There can be differences between Firehose Legacy and published data. For example, the mutation data in the publication usually underwent more QC, and false positives might have been removed or, in rare cases, false negatives added. RNA-Seq and copy-number values may also differ slightly, as different versions of analysis pipelines could have been used. Additionally, due to additional curation during the publication process, the clinical data for the publication may be of higher quality or may contain a few more data elements, sometimes derived from the genomic data (e.g., genomic subtypes).

The TCGA PanCancer Atlas datasets derive from an effort to unify TCGA data across all tumor types. Publications resulting from this effort can be found at the [TCGA PanCancer Atlas site](https://www.cell.com/pb-assets/consortium/pancanceratlas/pancani3/index.html). In the cBioPortal, data from the PanCancer Atlas is divided by tumor type, but these studies have uniform clinical elements, consistent processing and normalization of mutations, copy number, mRNA data and are ideally processed for comparative analyses.

> Non-GDC TCGA studies have the original mutation data generated by the individual TCGA sequencing centers. The source of the data is the Broad Firehose (or the publication pages for data that matches a specific manuscript). These data are usually a combination of two mutation callers, e.g. a variant caller like MuTect plus an indel caller. Note that the specific tools used and the overall process for identifying mutations can vary between centers and may have changed over time.

Reviewer 2: I think this is clearer if you say "TCGA studies not sourced from GDC" since you say "TCGA studies sourced from GDC..." below.

Data from AACR Project GENIE are provided in a [dedicated instance of cBioPortal](https://www.cbioportal.org/genie/). You can also download GENIE data from the [Synapse Platform](https://synapse.org/genie). Note that you will need to register before accessing the data. Additional information about AACR Project GENIE can be found on the [AACR website](https://www.aacr.org/Research/Research/Pages/aacr-project-genie.aspx).

### TCGA

> #### How do the TCGA studies sourced from Genomic Data Commons (GDC) compare to the other TCGA datasets? Which one should I use?

Reviewer 2: I think we should should leave the existing section "How does TCGA data in cBioPortal compare to TCGA data in Genome Data Commons?" , but maybe rename it to "How does TCGA Firehose Legacy data in cBioPortal compare to TCGA data in Genome Data Commons?".  Then we create a new section to describe the GDC data source from ISB-CGC.  Lets talk more about this at the standup.

Reviewer 2: Do we have any links to how GD. - mutation is generated?  To ISB or GDC?
